If you’re learning to program, you’ve probably noticed: there isn’t just one language. There are dozens.

And they all seem to do different things.

Daily Python Projects is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

This post gives you a clear, real-world overview of the most widely used programming languages today, with practical examples — not just abstract categories like “backend infrastructure.”

You’ll learn:

What each language is used for

Where it shows up in real applications

How it connects to the rest of a typical tech stack

Python
What it’s used for:
Building websites (especially the backend, where business logic and databases live)

Data science, machine learning, and data analysis

Automating repetitive tasks (renaming files, sending emails, scraping websites)

Writing scripts that “glue” systems together

Where it’s used:
Google uses Python for internal tools and AI systems

Instagram’s backend is largely Python

Udemy uses the Django web framework (written in Python) to power its entire website

What beginners should understand:
If you build a website in Python, Python handles what happens after someone submits a form or clicks a button — like storing data in a database, sending a confirmation email, or performing calculations.


Python is also widely used for data analysis. If you’ve ever seen people analyze spreadsheets or build ML models, they were likely using pandas, scikit-learn, or matplotlib — all Python libraries.


JavaScript
What it’s used for:
Making websites interactive

Building anything that runs inside the browser (drop-downs, sliders, autocomplete, etc.)

Also used on the backend via Node.js


Where it’s used:
Every modern website: Gmail, Netflix, Facebook, LinkedIn, etc.

React (a JavaScript library) powers the frontend of YouTube, Instagram, Twitter

What beginners should understand:
If you click a “submit” button and the page updates instantly without the URL reloading — that’s JavaScript. If the URL reloads, that is a backend language such as Python or PHP.

Javascript doesn’t talk directly to databases or files like Python does — it handles what the user sees and interacts with in the browser.

HTML and CSS (not programming languages, but essential)
What they’re used for:
HTML defines the structure of a webpage (headings, links, buttons)

CSS defines how it looks (fonts, colors, spacing)

Where they’re used:
Every website uses HTML and CSS

Modern websites use CSS frameworks like Bootstrap or Tailwind to save time

Here is how a webpage would look without CSS or Boostrap (left) and with CSS/Bootstrap (right).


What beginners should understand:
HTML is like the skeleton. CSS is the clothing and makeup.

Even if you use Python or JavaScript to build your app, you still need HTML/CSS to show it to users.

Java
What it’s used for:
Building complex systems for banks, insurance companies, and governments

Creating Android apps

Powering large backends that handle high traffic

Where it’s used:
Android apps are often written in Java

Netflix, Airbnb, Amazon, and many banks use Java to handle requests from millions of users

What beginners should understand:
Java is used when stability, speed, and reliability matter over time. It's popular in enterprise systems because it’s been battle-tested for decades.

Java apps often handle things like:

Payment processing

Inventory systems

Search services

Large user databases

SQL (Structured Query Language)
What it’s used for:
Interacting with databases

Finding, updating, or deleting data

Performing calculations inside the database (like counting users or summing purchases)

Where it’s used:
Everywhere data is stored in tables

Used in PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, Microsoft SQL Server, and more

What beginners should understand:
Let’s say your Python app needs to find all users who signed up this week. Python sends a request to the database using SQL, and the database responds with results.

Here is a typical SQL query:

SELECT name, age
FROM students
WHERE age > 18
ORDER BY age ASC;
If you were to execute that, SQL would access the “students” database table and retrieve the names and ages of students older than 18, sorted by age in ascending order.

SQL isn’t a general-purpose language — you use it to communicate with relational databases.

TypeScript
What it’s used for:
The same things as JavaScript — but with types, which help prevent bugs

Building larger, more complex frontends where reliability matters

Where it’s used:
Microsoft, Slack, Asana, Airbnb, and most large-scale web apps

Often used with React, Angular, or Vue

What beginners should understand:
TypeScript is just JavaScript with safety checks. It helps developers avoid subtle bugs in large codebases by catching errors during development.

It compiles to JavaScript — browsers don’t run TypeScript directly.

Go (Golang)
What it’s used for:
Writing tools that power cloud infrastructure (deployment, networking, logging)

Building fast web APIs and background services

Where it’s used:
Docker, Kubernetes, and Terraform are all written in Go

Google, Cloudflare, and Uber use Go to power parts of their infrastructure

What beginners should understand:
Imagine a service that needs to handle 10,000 web requests per second, like:

Serving images

Managing chat messages

Logging metrics

Go is used to build those backend services that run behind the scenes. It’s fast, simple, and handles concurrency well.

Rust
What it’s used for:
Writing high-performance, low-level software where memory safety matters

Replacing parts of older systems written in C/C++

Newer use cases: blockchain, web servers, browser engines

Where it’s used:
Mozilla Firefox uses Rust for some core components

Amazon, Cloudflare, and Meta are using Rust for safer, faster systems

Solana (a blockchain) is written in Rust

What beginners should understand:
Rust is used where performance and safety are both critical. It’s not the easiest language to learn, but it prevents bugs like memory leaks or crashes that C/C++ are notorious for.

It's not needed for most Python-level work, but it’s gaining popularity for system tools and high-stakes software.

C and C++
What they’re used for:
Writing operating systems

Building video games

Creating compilers, interpreters, and device drivers

Where they’re used:
Linux, Windows, macOS core components

Photoshop, MySQL, Blender, Unreal Engine

What beginners should understand:
You won’t use C/C++ for typical web apps or data science, but the tools and software you run every day likely rely on them.

C/C++ give you full control of memory and CPU usage — which is great for speed, but easy to mess up.

Summary: Who Uses What, and Why

Still confused?
If you're just getting started, Python is an excellent entry point — but the more you understand how the other languages fit in, the more capable you'll become across real-world systems.

Daily Python Projects is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.