Okay, imagine this:

You're building a LEGO castle.
But instead of starting from scratch, someone gives you a box full of ready-made pieces—doors, windows, towers, little horses, maybe even a dragon.

Daily Python Projects is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

That’s what a Python library is.

A library is a collection of code that someone else already wrote to help you build things faster.

So what’s a module, then?
Let’s keep going with the LEGO idea.

A module is like one single bag of LEGO bricks.
It might contain just what you need to build a door, or maybe a catapult.

In Python terms, a module is just a single .py file that has code inside.
Example:

import random
Here, you're importing a module called random that helps you generate random numbers.

And what’s a package?
A package is like a whole suitcase with multiple bags inside.
Each bag (module) does something slightly different, but together they make up a big toolbox.

In Python, a package is a folder that contains multiple .py files (modules) and usually has a file called __init__.py inside so Python knows “this is a package.”

Example:

from matplotlib import pyplot
matplotlib is the package.
pyplot is one of the modules inside.

Okay, now what’s a library?
Think of a library as a giant shelf filled with packages and modules.
There’s no strict technical definition in Python—it’s just a casual word people use to describe a collection of helpful code tools.

In practice:

The random module is part of the Python Standard Library.

The pandas library is a big third-party library (you install it).

Inside pandas, there are many modules and packages working together.

So:

Module = one .py file

Package = a folder with multiple .py files

Library = a general term for any tool or collection of tools you can import and use

Why does this matter?
Because when you learn Python, you don’t build everything from scratch.
You import tools that help you go faster. Like this:

import datetime
from random import randint
import pandas as pd
Each of those is grabbing some ready-made Python code that you can now use in your own project.
That’s the magic of libraries.
You’re not alone. You’ve got a toolbox.

TL;DR
Module = a single file of Python code

Package = a folder with several Python files

Library = a bunch of helpful code that can include modules, packages, or both

You import these to use tools other people already built

That’s how you stop reinventing the wheel and start building faster

